# group_management
Code of my Biodiversity Integrated Research Project on group management at the Centre for Research and Conservation.

In my Master of Science in Biology at Ghent University, I took the course Biodiversity Integrated Research Project. I went to the Centre for Research and Conservation at Antwerp Zoo to work on a project on group management of captive breeding populations. In this repository, you can access the R code we built for simulation of captive populations managed under different scenarios. It simulates different strategies of group management to unravel what strategies are most suitable for managing certain captive populations in zoos.

# Introduction to the topic
Managing captive populations is important for the conservation of certain threatened species. For example, the Socorro dove and the Bali myna are two bird species kept at Antwerp Zoo that highlight the importance of conservation breeding in zoos very well. These two species probably wouldn’t be around anymore without conservation breeding. The Socorro dove is completely exterminated on the island of Socorro where it used to live, but zoos in Europe and America breed this species so that they can be at one point reintroduced into the wild. This already has been done for the Bali myna: it was practically extinct in the wild as well, but now the population has grown to about 100 individuals.

European zoos cooperate closely to manage captive populations of threatened species. There are two types of breeding programmes: the more intensive European Endangered Species Program or EEP and the less intensive European Studbook or ESB. Both approaches rely on collecting all data on births, deaths, transfers etc. of specific individuals in so-called studbooks. Based on this information, the coordinator of the breeding program can analyse the population and can make recommendations ons what animals should move to where and what animals should mate with what animals in order to keep the population demographically and genetically sustainable. Each row in a studbook holds the known data about one specific individual. In these traditional breeding programs, it is crucial that you can recognize individual animals and that you need to collect detailed information about it. For bonobos, elephants or okapis, this works fine. But what to think of small animals that are kept in large groups, such as flamingos, sometimes kept in groups of hundreds of individuals? Zookeepers can’t tell the different individuals apart, so the only thing we can rely on to keep these population genetically diverse is exchange of ‘non-specific’ individuals. There has been little scientific attention for how to manage these populations properly, so what I did in my research project was investigating what possible management strategies work best for keeping these populations sustainable.

# About the code
This is a graphic simulation of how the script is built up. First, in an input block, you specify a series of input variables: demographic variables, details about how the groups are subdivided among life support systems and institutes and so on. Next, a founder population is made as a dataframe that holds a line of information about every individual.
After that, the actual simulation begins. A series of steps is repeated for every generation: first, breeding takes place, so new individuals are added to the dataframe. Then, animals die and are removed from the dataframe. Then, if applicable, kinships between individuals are calculated. Animals are then transferred to other groups according to the selected transfer strategy and frequency, and data is stored for later analysis. In the end, the script also gives graphical representation of genetic diversity, inbreeding, number of individuals and number of transfers, crashes and rescues as an output.
